during football season this past autumn
many players many african-american
players knelt in protest during the
national anthem in the words of our
guest today they were not speaking truth
to power
they were mindlessly loyal to a black
identity that had run its course close
quote
author Shelby Steele on uncommon
knowledge now
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson we're shooting today from the
how Gaudet aureum of the trade tell
building a new building of the Hoover
Institution here at Stanford a native of
Chicago Shelby Steele taught English
literature for a number of years at San
Jose State University then in 1990 his
book the content of our character a new
vision of race in America established
him as an author of national importance
now a fellow at the Hoover Institution
dr. Steele is the author of a number of
books including white guilt how blacks
and whites together destroyed the
promise of the civil rights era and
shame how America's past sins have
polarized our country dr. Steele is also
a frequent contributor to The Wall
Street Journal where he recently
published a column headlined black
protest has lost its power Shelby Steele
welcome thank you
good to be here the protests again you
wrote of the players who took a knee
during the national anthem in this last
football season they were mindlessly
loyal to a black identity that had run
its course wow that's quite a claim go
ahead and just just explain what you
what you mean by that
there is a blacks obviously have
undergone in the course of America the
three 400 years that America has been
around and victimized blackness and
slavery and segregation and all those
things we were all very much aware of my
point is that out of that came an
identity a group identity that has been
for better and worse focus grounded in
the idea of blacks as victims and black
victimization has become a sort of
centerpiece of that identity and an
identity I think in the case of the NFL
protestors it's sort of dislodged from
reality and functions put just pretty
much on its own so once once they felt
called upon to make some symbolic
test against America and racism they do
they sort of mindlessly went along with
that without ever stopping to
investigate whether there really was
oppression to what degree of of
oppression is involved in in American
life today for for blacks my argument is
that not very much mmm
and yet the the in congruence of not
refusing to kneel for the national
anthem when this country despite its
sins also was a country that for the
last 60 years has truly transformed
itself morally and and America to
Americans today are different people in
regard to to all these issues and I
thought the protest was it was it was in
a obsolescent gesture that made that no
one found much meaning in you said in a
recent interview on a ricochet podcast
quote this is not segregated America I
grew up in segregated America so I know
the difference is closer let's talk a
little bit about Shelby Steele's a young
man mmm um you I have a few experiences
here that you've written about notably
in shame your last book and that I've
heard you talk about because we've been
friends for years your elementary school
in a Chicago suburb mm-hmm your parents
joins other parents ensuing to change
that what was that school like that
school was an elementary school in a
school district where there were only
two schools one was all white and one
was all black and we would see the white
kids drive to school the school bus and
wintertime and we were a while we sort
of you had to walk this we had to walk
we got their textbooks when when they
were worn out so we got their teachers
when the teachers began to have problems
and
nervous breakdown or something they'd be
transferred to our school so you
experienced it yes it was abusive it was
there's no doubt about it
it was a horror and even among
segregated schools this one was
particularly bad my parents did they
actually led the protest my mother and
father organized the parents and
boycotted that that school and so there
were no students going to it and
eventually they prevailed the teachers
were were fired the principal was fired
and the new school was was was started
up so beginning when you were a little
boy you saw real segregation yes real
abuse everywhere and protest when there
was something to protest well the the
that's the point I think in the 60s when
we think about the protest that so it
began became really severe in the in the
50s and and mounted all the way to the
60s and I think of 1964 in civil rights
bill as the point at which America
capitulated and apologized
we were wrong here's a huge piece of
legislation affirming our our commitment
to not do this anymore now that bill has
a lot of problems that have subsequently
come due to hurt us but as a as a
historical gesture it was it was a a one
to create moral acknowledgments of any
society in ever it was a really
remarkable event and blacks in in a
sense deserve an enormous amount of
credit for protesting in that era
because there was every anybody there
was no debate in America about whether
or not there was racial discrimination
everybody knew there was the question
was what we're going to do about it
and blacks protest push that
I think all the way to the point where
America finally did your pitch like Rosa
Parks was genuinely a great figure she
was Jenny Martin Luther King jr. is
genuinely a historic figure these people
sacrificed enormous Lee they took every
kind of risk imaginable they achieved
truly great something truly great it was
a moment when black America as I say in
the article touched greatness we
extended the democracy past the barrier
of race so historically that was that
was in a sense our gift to America now
you write in shame about a trip that you
took to Africa at the age of 23 let me
quote shame this entire trip was
organized around visits to cities like
Algiers cities associated with
independence movements and revolutions
that had swept the third world in the
1950s and 60s I wanted to see if there
was some counterpoint to the American
Way of life that was better yeah and
what did you see I didn't find that but
I think you know I was coming of age I
was a college student it was just out of
college I was working in the war on
poverty programs and there was a point
because after after the civil rights
victories in the sort of late 60s where
black people began to began to create
this identity that we call blackness and
this it was angry and it was resentful
and it was separatist there was the
illusion in it somehow that we could we
would get farther as a separate unified
people than we would by joining America
and becoming regular citizens I will I
confess I was caught up in that I wanted
to see and it was what was so seductive
about it is that it said blackness is
the answer to all of your eggs
is about life what you should do where
you should should I go to graduate
school well if you if you just
really focused on blackness those issues
kind of kind of go away at least that
was the illusion I was seduced by that
and so yes my wife and I took a trip to
to Africa beginning at Algeria where we
excuse me we met with the Black Panthers
who were in exile there and we traveled
south of the Sahara and to Ghana were
wearing kuma had been the president to
Senegal where Leopold's Singur these
great sort of romantic colonialist
figures anti-colonialist sort of
revolutionary figure is you know
dramatic to their countries and it was a
good lesson very large very quick those
countries were we're not doing well they
were disorganized they were overwhelmed
with corruption there was no sort of
common direction they were lost and they
hadn't and they couldn't go back to
being a colony again and yet they also
did not know how to go into the future
and and building a new nation so I
learned a lot there it transformed me it
made me realize that your racial
identity is is a passive thing it's not
it's your your racial identity is not an
agent of change it is not going to build
a new life for you it is not going to do
all the things that that life calls upon
you to do for yourself in fact it's a
delusion in which you can waste an awful
lot of time back to your recent piece in
The Wall Street Journal she'll be quote
racism is endemic to the human condition
just as stupidity is
we will always have to be on guard
against it but now in the United States
it is recognized as a scourge what has
happened is that black America has
confronted with a new problem
the shock of freedom mmm close quote
the shock of freedom as a problem
explain that well if you have been an
oppressed people and we were obviously
truly oppressed for centuries we learned
all sorts of things
in order to survive that I won't go into
a long list but but we we learned how to
reinvent ourselves we learned how to
live with the this dis oppression with
this sort of negative force in your life
we we were I think miraculous we created
a great music out of this we we did
other things in that world there had a
worldwide impact we expanded the idea of
democracy and made it and made freedom
and absolute we did all those things the
one thing we never did never had a
chance to do was to live in freedom we
were never free we were always in a
position of calculating our fate through
those who dominated us we were never
just free to invent ourselves as we
wanted to ah and that the fact that
beginning in the 60s when we began to
confront freedom when I could backed up
and said okay who's discrimination is
wrong they're a bunch of laws to support
that we're confronted well what do you
do with freedom what are you gonna do
now and historically it scared the hell
out of us we would be fantasizing if we
denied that who wouldn't be freedom is a
frightening thing it places such a
burden of responsibility on you on the
person who has it you're now responsible
you're rep you
is based not on what you do well
combined with that was the fact that for
centuries of oppression had left us in
many ways underdeveloped so when freedom
comes freedom then says we're not
oppressing you anymore
you're responsible for you're under
development and you fix it or you notice
up to you and that was you know that way
it required freedom requires a whole a
wholly different orientation toward the
world and we became afraid and what
happens then again you when you're
afraid you don't know how to move
forward you start to move backward
Shelby the argument would be and I know
what the argument is because your piece
in The Wall Street Journal created let's
put it this way there was a response on
the internet you could you can google
Shelby steel and some of the quotations
I've just read and you'll get a response
and the argument would be no no no no
stop there we're with you everything
you've said makes perfect sense right up
until you get to the point that we're
free now mm-hmm as you as you say the
era of black oppression is over no it's
not there's still all kinds of racism
endemic to this is how do you how do you
well here's here's um here's some
statistics I found 2015 black households
at the 20th and 40th percentile of
household income that is lower middle
class and pretty poor people earned an
average of 55 percent as much as white
households at those same two percentiles
and that's exactly the same same figures
in 1967 and so the answer is dr. steel
just look at that we haven't Africa I
shouldn't say we Avenue
african-americans haven't made an iota
of progress of course this has to be
because we're still unrest how do you
deal with that our it's it's a
corruption and it's a corruption because
if you look at that's the statistical
difference
from then up up to now who says that's
because of racism
maybe it's because you yet you haven't
yet developed the value system to the
ideas with which to thrive in freedom
maybe you don't know what to do with the
opportunities that surround you it's
understandable you were oppressed and
and people have not pointed out to you
the challenge of freedom and what do
people do with with with freedom when
they don't know how to handle it they
reinvent their oppression even as it has
faded away they make it up in their mind
all over again
racism is around every corner there is
systemic racism there's structural
racism there are microaggressions and
and there's white privilege and all of
the all of this this is is designed
again to is the shock of freedom and not
knowing I mean you look at today's black
leadership they have no clue of how to
move ahead all they can think to do is
ask for more from the government
well we've asked for the government has
given us almost everything nowhere in
history as the government paid off its
people more than America has in the last
60 years and yet we are by most
socioeconomics measures farther behind
white America than we were in the
fifties when we had none of these social
programs and so forth so it is freedom
is a is a it comes with a judgmentalism
it it judges you if you don't know how
to thrive and freedom its bigots it
means that you are at fault you are in
the worst word you can use regarding
blacks you are inferior the chill
idea but it's at the heart that's it is
the heart of this shock of freedom
because freedom now is saying you can't
use oppression as an excuse anymore if
you're not doing well it's not because
of oppression for Christ for goodness
sakes we've got affirmative action we've
got everything to help you if you're not
doing well now it's on you and and so
one of my points about the protest the
NFL protests and it's the same with with
the black lives matter is that there's
this sort of hysteria technical
protesting that when they can't even
articulate what they're protesting
against when of racism is so virulent it
ought to be obvious when I was a kid it
was obvious no one denied it it was it
was visible to everybody every day and
that was the beginning in the end of it
today where is it
where are you being stopped well I want
to rise I want to be a politician I want
to be the president okay but you want to
be the CEO of such-and-such a
corporation okay you can do anything you
want the reality and that and the
problem with that is it occupies black
America today is the fact that we are at
last a free people Shelby you said a
moment ago the federal government's
given us everything
let me read you you know this well
President Johnson's 1965 commencement
address at Howard University quote you
do not take a person who has been
hobbled by chains and bring him up to
the starting line of a race and say
you're free to compete with the others
equal opportunity is essential but not
enough
close quote so this notion that there
has to be compensation for all those
years of oppression is fundamental to
all policy concerning African Americans
for the last half century and more
mm-hmm and what I want to know is in
your view was Johnson
wrecked in 1965 but that view is wrong
now that measures were necessary
affirmative action transfer payments all
of that was necessary but at some point
it began to become to hold African
Americans back what I just wonder what
you're thinking or was it wrong to begin
with or do we still need it now what is
your thinking on that well it's so basic
to the federal government's relationship
with African Americans even today yes I
remember that speeches been quoted I've
quoted it how many times you can't bring
somebody up to the starting line and
that's been oppressed and expect them to
compete what that is really about is not
about black people because black people
were in the position of coming into
freedom you can do what you want you can
help them or not but they're gonna have
to deal with it in some way that
statement was about what I've written a
good deal about white guilt and it was
it was a horrible historical far as I'm
concerned mistake because what Johnson
was saying was we are going to do we we
oppressed you now we're gonna lift you
up and redeem you you're still our
responsibility your fate remains in our
hands right your fate you don't see your
fate as being in your hands it's now in
our hands the government's hands every
kind of philanthropic groups in
everybody's hands but yours and so it
was we then had to have had 60 years of
white guilt why did why did just merica
spend I've heard as the figure as high
as 22 trillion dollars in that time
spent on all manner of welfare and
programs and and so forth educational
programs none of what you've ever worked
but it is it's a white guilt is a very
specific thing it is not a genuine
feeling of guilt nothing to do with that
it is that
the literal terror of being seen as a
racist everybody knows in America that's
the bottom line if you are seen as a
racist openly in public you are ruined
you have no life whites live and we've
not acknowledged this enough 90 person
was doing is saying I can't have you
call me and I can't have you call this
country a racist mmm and so I'm gonna
give you a whole bunch of things I don't
and I worked in those programs so I know
I know them intimately they were just
sort of what we would say jump off the
toilet programs anything with just
something we can throw money at to say
we're not racist we don't care whether
it works we have known it we have no
we're not gonna follow up if it we had
school busing for how many decades
ruining the public school system no one
even asked a question about what was the
point of that all these bad ideas school
integration is going to school an
integration did absolutely nothing black
students were still unable to compete
because the focus was on what the
government was going to do in this sort
of thing and not on what what black
students do so white guilt has been a
real driver of these these corruptions
and these these football players down on
their knees know that and you know that
the owners are gonna capitulate and
throw some something their way Roger
Goodell NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell
quote they're talking about equality
issues making sure that we're doing
everything we possibly can we in the NFL
are doing every or we enter the United
States actually I'm not sure what he
meant we're doing everything we possibly
can to give people an opportunity
whether it's education or economic what
do you make of that statement what in
the world is that going to do with
football that has that is a you know
just a perfect white guilt statement
he's saying he may as well just say I'm
innocent
I'm innocent I'm innocent I'm innocent
I'm innocent I'm not a racist I'm not a
racist and he will find a way to see if
I understand he has give millions of
dollars to some some cause called social
justice well what is that I can tell you
what that is that's a lot of hustling
that's a lot of black hustlers stepping
forward to take that hundred million
dollars and put it in their pocket and
and and make things it's it's those are
those of you again you you you you
create a whole class of hustlers you
make black leaders black leadership
today is pretty much nothing left but
hustlers who work white guilt all right
so what is to be done what is to be done
though let's just work our way through a
couple of the obvious problems here
we've got poverty african-americans are
disproportionately poor two-fifths of
african-american households receive food
stamps it's a much higher percentage
than for any other ethnic group and
we've got inequality I mentioned a
moment ago that the lower income groups
in among African Americans were earned
only 55 percent as much as the same
their their counterparts or white
counterparts turns out even if you go up
the income scale you've got upper class
and middle class blacks are in about
two-thirds as much as their white
counterparts which is the same figure as
half a century ago so you've got
disproportionate poverty and even among
African Americans who are doing well
they're not doing as well as their white
counterparts mm-hmm what do you do you
the first thing I think you do is you
name the reasons why and certainly
racism is no longer a reason if it is a
reason it is 18th or 20th on the list of
reasons it is not worth your time it's
not worth focusing on or worrying much
about there are no important forces in
American life advocating for racism you
need
as blacks we need to ask ourselves why
we have become so dependent on this
delusion that we live in a society that
is intent on keeping us down that's over
with
it isn't that kind of it's just over
with we need to face ourselves more
frankly you guys as 75% of all black
children born out of wedlock you
understand the kind of dysfunction just
that statistic alone
that's a problem now who's going to fix
that the government we you know we there
has to be right now we have an identity
as blacks that's victim focus we're
victims which basically is designed to
tap in the white guilt and get to get
them to give us all kinds of little
basically crumbs and we're just sort of
locked in to that and we owe and there's
no examination of how self-reliance more
personal responsibility for one's
decisions in life that these are the
things that now determine our fate and
the and again I blame a lot of this on
the original oppression we weren't that
was not an experience it taught us these
things these values and principles that
other people take for granted well we've
now got to take those take up those
principles we've now got to stop
thinking of ourselves as victims and
think of ourselves as free men and women
in this world with every kind of
opportunity life is tough for everybody
no doubt about that but but free people
are free to move from one thing to
another to find themselves to find their
voice to find out what they can do in
life and to me that's blackness that's
blackness or it ought to be
what has passes for blackness now is
just a kind of mindless mimicry of anger
there is
that is is struck me with the NFL as as
really an instance of pathos where it's
sad it's just sad to see these football
players out there on their knee when
they can't even articulate what they're
protesting against I can tell you that
Martin Luther King knew what he was
protesting against he articulated it as
superbly as as possible and people
responded the country responded these
these players today of black lives
matter and other sorts of groups are
pathetic there's no other there's no
nice way to say it they they are they
just sat in you they don't inspire you
they saddened you affirmative action do
away with it I have an ambivalent
position on affirmative action as I said
if the Ku Klux Klan had invented a
social policy to keep black people down
they could not have done a better job
than affirmative action but I have a
very much mild point of view about these
matters no affirmative action just
basically says what's important about
you is the color of your skin the very
thing that was important about us when
we were oppressed when do we get to be
human beings when do we get to be people
who compete on their own merit so now I
get accepted at Harvard and I'm at
Harvard and I'm on the campus and
everybody there knows I wouldn't be
there were not for affirmative action
and you they're gonna rub that in my
face and and they're gonna diminish me
and so I'm fighting all over again for
my humanity it wasn't one one fight
enough I've got it we now have to
overcome the blemish the the
diminishment that affirmative action
imposed on us again driven by white
guilt
White's are so blind to the humanity of
blacks that they put a program like this
force them into it it's not it's not
invite it's it's not that's right you
can't opt you can opt out you're you're
in it and and then you have to make you
have to rationalize that and by saying
you're a victim and we're back in the
same the same game again your of your
I'm a victim and so therefore I deserve
this and I don't have to become
competitive and so so affirmative action
is is the sort of archetypal re
oppression of people that is an
oppressive system that you've inflicted
on black Americans so that you can get
an optical an optic that shows you to be
innocent of racism even as you are
Magnus's yeah few last questions shortly
and to return to your column in The Wall
Street Journal quote the oppression of
black people is over with
we blacks are today a free people close
quote the response to that column among
African Americans I'm sure that they
will be apoplectic and this is this and
does prove my point because we we um you
you see all the damage done over the
last sixty years with by focusing on our
victimization and so forth well rather
than rather than say oh my goodness we
we in fact it is over our oppression is
over with
we really are Free People we scream to
high heavens that still is crazy that
it's laughable
can't you see racism everywhere white
supremacy is just infused into the
literally the air of America so that
black people are well what is this this
longing for an identity of black
identity grounded in victimization is a
longing for an excuse to not accept the
challenge of freedom it is a way to
escape that challenge shall be quotation
here Supreme Court Justice Clarence
Thomas in his 2003 opinion and critter
versus Bollinger a case that against his
wishes permitted universities to
continue affirmative action but here's
what Clarence Thomas wrote in his
opinion I believe blacks can achieve in
every avenue of American life without
meddling close quote your with Clarence
Thomas absolutely here's the question
let me give you a pretty complete list
of the prominent African Americans who
are with you and Justice Thomas it's
Shelby Steele and it's Clarence Thomas
and it's Tom soul and I have two fingers
left I'm sure there are some that I'm
not aware yes I'm okay so where are the
other voices do you do you do yous are
there some young voices coming up are
you hopeful as you survey the scene yes
I am hopeful because you know I think
attrition solve certain problems how
long can you can you go on in delusion
you know how it takes more and more
labor again the NFL protests was was
important to me because there it was
this is so over with this is so
excelling at and whites backed away from
football I mean the viewership went down
the ticket sales were something tonight
I don't even know how to express this
exactly but I can tell you what a lot of
my friends are is wait a minute we just
went through eight years of an
african-american president and every one
of those young african-american men
who's taking a knee is a millionaire but
you know what White's don't get to say
what the heck are you guys thinking what
they do is they just turn off the chain
there's something operating so that
everything that goes around comes around
to use a over worn cliche I mean it and
one of the things that and one of the
things I think that I play some hope in
is I look for whites it's what I call
race fatigue that as as we keep going
down this path whites are going to
become more and more immune to it and I
think the foot the NFL football protest
was a good example of that whites have
now said we're not gonna come out in
public but privately we don't believe
you anymore we think you're a fraud we
don't think you're that oppressed you
know we can't say anything because then
you just call us racist and we'll we'll
pay another way but we don't buy it and
you leave that we America is gonna see
more and more whites turning away
disbelieving it doesn't mean that
they're going to become racist it means
that they're not there they're going to
see the reality which is that you two
blacks you have not yet taken enough
responsibility for the freedom that you
enjoy this is a hard thing but I can
tell you if if we got up tomorrow
morning and white America said that in
some symbolic way everything would be
changed so Shelby where do you see I'm
just thinking back to civil right I mean
it is not insignificant that Martin
Luther King jr. was the Reverend Martin
Luther King jr. that the basis of so
much of the moral energy of the civil
rights movement was the black the
african-american church as it does that
is that Institute where do you see the
voices where's where um where do those
who agree with you place their feet when
to set themselves to speak and to try to
pursue this to say what you're saying
well we're at a point it does at this
time when when there aren't that man
when when sad to say blacks who do that
are going to be instantly called Uncle
Tom's just as whites who do that are
going to be called racist the blacks who
are not in the victim focused identity
they're going to be called Uncle Tom's
and rejected and so forth and but there
are I believe millions of people on both
sides whites and blacks who know
something's wrong no this is not real
this can't be dependent on in the future
and so you know the the more blacks
voted for Donald Trump than for for Mitt
Romney where'd that come from
you tell me I'm puzzled on that - I had
no people I have friends who who I never
would I never would have dreamed that
they would have done anything but vote
Democratic who just liked the honesty of
the man the you know he's not let me let
me give you an optimized let me give you
a possible president and then returned
to the president the possible president
is Oprah Winfrey no really you don't
think that she would have an opportunity
to speak to African Americans and to say
the or you think she just wouldn't say
the kinds of things that you were saying
now she's had an opportunity to say
these kinds of things and she is just
terrified and so if if in other words
she's not a person who's gonna break
this this lock she's she is nothing
against open with her and admire her as
entrepreneur and a personality and
celebrity in every way and she's she's
smart lady
and maybe she will run you know maybe I
who can predict what America will do
will she break this logjam her
popularity is based on this long Jam
being in place and to say all of a
sudden that blacks are not victims
anymore that they have to start making
it they have
to pick up more self-reliance and
responsibilities would she be so loved
so admired she's hiding behind a a the
the conventional sort of conventional
wisdom don't rock this boat if she
starts to rock the boat
I can't she she but if she do it you'd
say more power to her I'd say more I'd
say she I said she would have a chance
to change change history all right
Donald Trump is he racist no he's not
racist is he helping after it let me say
this but what is what is a racist
I have racist impulses I've never met a
human being who didn't we will always
have to watch out for those impulses in
ourselves
they are automatic they are reflexive
they're not reflective they're reflexive
and we will always have to watch out for
that and make them utterly impermissible
so the point is is that you we we can't
just say we can't use racism politically
anymore
it's it's we're not we're no longer in a
place where racism exists yes but is
racism a problem
no and you I've heard you mention that
you're impressed that race just doesn't
seem to matter to Trump that's right you
know I don't think I don't think Donald
Trump is getting up in the morning and
saying you know what I have to figure
out how to keep do a better job of
keeping black people down today I don't
think that's the case I think when he
went to Harlem during his campaign and
he went to the black church and he
leaned over the podium and he said what
have you got to lose
he spoke more honestly to black people
than any person of his stature in my
memory
and some some black people heard that
what are you gonna keep going back to
the party that keeps offering you the
very things that keep that oppress you
you know there we're due for some
changes and hopefully they'll come
sooner than than later
last question Shelby let me quote
Frederick Douglass the great in the
former slave in regard this is a 1863 in
regard to the colored people there is
always more that is benevolent I
perceive than just manifested toward us
what I ask for the Negro is not
benevolence not pity not sympathy but
simply justice the American people have
always been anxious to know what they
shall do with us do nothing with us your
interference is doing us positive injury
close quote that's Frederick Douglass
speaking to white Americans in 1863 last
question what does Shelby Steele say to
white Americans today well I couldn't
say anything better than that that is
that is I'm very well I've quoted that
myself abused it I'm a great fan of
Frederick Douglass he's the greatest of
all time what truth how long is it gonna
take us to absorb that message so simply
put yet so absolutely
so absolutely true and what I would I
would say to White's
is have a little more faith in yourself
do you have ill-will toward people of
different races and backgrounds than you
obviously know that's something you
cannot indulge that's it that's it
Shelby Steele author of the classic book
the content of our character and most
recently of shame how America's past
sins have polarized our country thank
you thank you very much for being for
uncommon knowledge in the Hoover
Institution I'm Peter Robinson
[Music]